Article 10658 of sci.electronics:
From: gene@cooper.cooper.EDU (Gene (the Spook) )
Newsgroups: sci.electronics
Subject: Re: reviving nicads
Date: 9 Nov 90 01:48:05 GMT

in article <1990Nov6.195112.11285@infonode.ingr.com>, fordke@infonode.ingr.com (Keith Ford x8614) says:
>
> I once worked for a fellow who showed me a way to revive a nicad
> battery.  I think it involved pumping a high current through for
> a few seconds.  Can anyone expand on this or provide other useful
> information.  Please email if possible.  Thanks!  -kef/MM-

To get rid of a short, you can "zap" the NiCd from a capacitor and a
higher-than-normal voltage source, just as you described.  A few thousand
microfarads and about 6V or so would probably be enough to blow the short
like a fuse.

When NiCds "forget" that they were charged, usually from being lightly
discharged and then recharged, over and over, the best way to "fix" that
is to deep-discharge the cell almost down to nothing, and then *slowly*
recharge it at about half to a quarter of its usual charging current,
and then repeat this deep-discharge/slow-recharge cycle twice or thrice.

Hope this helps some...

							Spookfully yours,
							Gene

Article 10689 of sci.electronics:
From: kronstad@tortoise.cis.ohio-state.edu (richard b kronstad)
Newsgroups: sci.electronics
Subject: Re: reviving nicads
Date: 10 Nov 90 20:22:36 GMT



I have revived a couple of Nicads myself.  basically you want to charge up
a capacitor (try samller ones at first -1 uF) up to over 100 volts with
a DC source.  An AC source (such as a wall socket) will work as long as
the capacitor is NOT ELECTROLYTIC (I blew a few up myself - nice blue glow)
and the capacitor is rated WELL ABOVE 200 volts since you will cause a lot of
current to flow - Come to think of it I DON"T RECOMMEND USING A WALL SOCKET!

CHarge up the capacitor using a transformer and rectified at around 150 volts.
Remove the capacitor (carefully - it could be a shoking experience if you touch
the leads) and connect the diode "-" side to the Nicad "-" side and do the
same with the "+" sides.  You might see a spark, but that's allright because
you want to spike the battery with an instant high current to break the
crystals which cause a battery to die.  The capacitor is necessary so
that the total amount of electrons flowing is instantaneous and then nothing.
I have noticed that is you have spiked a Nicad once or twice it should work
again - not quite up to new capacity but it will work.  Because the Nicad
already had grown crystals spiking the Nicad will revive the batter but
it is only a matter of time for the crystals to grow back causing the battery
to die again.

I hope this helped,  I can't be responsible for your getting shocked but
just be carefull not to touch anything high voltage - expecially the DC
from a transformer!
