Article 68179 of sci.electronics:
From: dmiller@crl.com (Donald J. Miller)
Newsgroups: sci.electronics
Subject: Re: Renewal Batteries vs. "typical" alkalines
Date: 23 Jan 1994 18:14:06 -0800

Martin F. Falatic (mff@mentor.cc.purdue.edu) wrote:

:   lying about, and found the following, _after_ I ran the Renewals thru the
: charger (the decreased performance remained):
: 	
: 	Rayovac Renewal  	  Typical Alkaline
:    AA	7.4 A			 6.7 A (Rayovac Maximum, pretty new)
:     C	4.8 A			  ?? A (Didna have any! guess ~ 8.0 A)
:     D	6.7 A			10.2 A (Energizer, kinda old)

I have done some testing on these batteries for possible use in a portable
consumer product, and one thing that I found was that although Rayovac
claims that these batteries have a full charge right out of the package,
this is not always necessarily so.  This may have had an effect on your data.

: 	Now, is it me, or isn't the whole idea of AA, C, and D that load
: capacity should increase up that scale? It's obvious on the "Typical
: Alkaline" side of my chart, but the Renewal side is ridiculous. Perhaps I
: got a bad set of batteries (of 3 different sizes, etc.), but I think the
: problem is with the Renewals themselves.

If you are really interested, try repeating your test with brand new
batteries that have been stuck in the charger before the test.

: 	Either way, if anyone out there has any suggestions, or comments,
: or a FAQ :)  (if I am beating a soggy dead horse,) drop me some e-mail. I

I think this topic is of wide interest, so I think a post is better.

A Rayovac aps engineer visited our company and told us the following:

1) Renewal Cells will have a total capacity greater than that of a simular
   sized NiCad, but somewhat less that a regular Alkaline cell.  The
   capacity of these cells is measured down to the 0.9 volt per cell
   point.

2) The claimed 25 charges is a rough number.  Each charge cycle results in
   a reduction of capacity.  When the charge lifetime is short enough to
   get on your nerves, you throw them away.

3) If you don't discharge the batteries all the way down to 0.9 volts
   per cell, you will get MORE charge cycles.  If you consistantly run
   them below the 0.9 volt point, you will get less.  These batteries
   love to be topped off.
   (ongoing testing that I am running confirms this)

4) These cells contain no mercury, so they are "green".

5) The principle reason regular alkaline cells can not be re-charged is
   because of excess hydrogen gas that is built up within the cell.
   Renewal batteries are possible because of a tweak in their chemistry
   that eliminates this problem.

6) The battery charger (power station) has a special ASIC that measures
   the internal battery impedance of an inserted cell to make sure that
   it does not charge an inserted NiCad.  The recharger will refuse to
   try to charge a NiCad.

7) The Power Station will not attempt to charge a regular alkaline or a
   zinc-carbon cell because of the way that the charger makes electrical
   contact with the positive end of the cell.  If you look closely at
   the top (nub) end of the cell, you will notice that the outside
   insulation jacket does not QUITE go to the top of the cell.  This is
   where the positive charging contact touches the cell.  On a regular
   cell, this point is insulated.  If you scrape the insulation away
   from a regular cell, the exposed surface is the NEGATIVE side of the
   cell, not the positive.

8) The charging of each cell must be closely managed.  This is why a
   special ASIC in the power station is employed.  Unfortunately, this
   makes it difficult to use these in OEM applications where they are
   sealed in a multi-cell pack.  It could conceivably be done if taps
   were brought out from each cell contact.  This is probably enough to
   make it too expensive to design a Renewal Pack.

The above pretty much constitutes a COMPLETE DUMP of what I know about
these cells, so I am the wrong source for followup questions.  If
someone wants to research this further and generate a FAQ, they are
welcome to use this article as a starting point.

It seems that these cells will perform quite well if you avoid deep
discharge cycles.  If you come back from camping, fishing, or working
on the car, don't just throw your flashlight in the corner -- charge
the batteries right away.  They will serve you longer.

Don Miller    dmiller@crl.com


